
The paper reports on the ongoing development of (1) a new Knowledge Graph for visual historical sources and their contextualisation, based on the Digital Heraldry Ontology , and (2) demonstrates by two examples how we approach the question of exploring these data to answer specific historical research questions. 

The ontology focuses on the description of heraldic sources from medieval and early modern Europe. During this period, heraldry was omnipresent and constituted an important but still largely understudied instrument of visual communication used by vast parts of pre-modern European societies (Hiltmann 2019; 2018). It consisted of a mostly fixed set of symbolic primitives, that were combined into an abstract code of shapes and colors which were represented as coats of arms. Applied to supports as diverse as books, walls, stained glass and objects of all kinds, they could convey identity and status, property and claims, kinship or even abstract political and theological concepts – depending on the context in which they were used and by whom (Hablot 2019). 

Therefore, in order to study them, context matters. This covers their materiality (where they have been represented), relevant actors (which person or institutional entity is represented by the coat of arms and who put it on) and the social role of those actors (in what function and for what purpose did they use the coat of arms). This complexity is modelled by the Digital Heraldry Ontology , encompassing the symbolic primitives of the coats of arms as well as the material and societal context of their usage. Drawing on multiple sources of different provenance, the project is building a Knowledge Graph that combines information on over 40,000 different coats of arms. 

Using Semantic Web Technologies to deal with complex and heterogeneous data like this can be considered a standard in the fields of Digital History and Digital Cultural Heritage as an increasing number of large scale projects show (Dijkshoorn et al. 2018; Gehrke et al. 2015; Zamborlini and Betti 2017; Wang et al. 2020). However, this technology is, at least in historical research, only very rarely applied to generate new knowledge with data-driven methods, e.g. as early proposed by (Lin, Hong, and Doerr 2008) . After briefly introducing the Knowledge Graph and its ontology, we will therefore focus on two examples and discuss ways how this data can not only be modeled but also explored for historical research. 

First, we will show how querying and analyzing the ontology can be used to trace the development of coats of arms into increasingly complex means of communication and how this development can be placed in time and space. On the one hand, this is an important historical question that has not yet been answered (Hiltmann 2019), on the other hand, it allows us to discuss how ontologies can be applied to the study of specific research questions.  

The second example shows how we use Graph Embeddings (Ristoski et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2017; Yang et al. 2020; El-Hajj et al. 2021) to transform the data into vector space and then to cluster murals and painted ceilings which feature coats of arms as means of communication. We will show how Graph Embeddings allow us to account for historical context in a scalable way, including the functional, temporal, and territorial context of the edifices in which the murals were displayed, as well as their patrons, to the extent that this information is available – and thus discuss the necessities for a successful application of this method. Studying how to query over contextual data, we also address an open research problem for the analysis of Knowledge Graphs in general (Hogan et al. 2021). 

To experts outside the domain of historical research, the talk will point out starting points to utilize Knowledge Graphs not only for the modeling but also for the data driven analysis of cultural heritage. This way, we want to contribute to open a dialogue on how to make use of the increasing number of data, provided by Knowledge Graphs, for domain specific research, profiting from their structure and flexibility, while also ensuring that general methodological as well as epistemological implications and challenges (Pierazzo 2019) inherent to historical data, are dealt with. 

Acknowledgements 

The project is funded by the Volkswagen Foundation (VolkswagenStiftung) under the title “Die Performanz der Wappen (2). Zur Ausdifferenzierung der heraldischen Kommunikation im hohen und späten Mittelalter (12.-15. Jahrhundert)”. 


# notes
